three two okay so very nice to meet you
and very your book is fantastic
I've really really loved it and it's
kind of hilarious how this conversation
came about you said you got a call from
your publicist because your audiobook
spiked its spiking like crazy it was
like what cosmic dust and the BAM outer
bands of Jupiter just did that because
we don't figure out what it was it just
spiked like crazy went nuts I think it
went to number one briefly okay so what
did that anyway and it was from an
Instagram post it was and you will see
my friend Steve Rinella wrote a book
called American Buffalo and I had put on
Instagram how great the book was and he
did the audio version of it and a friend
of mine on Instagram he goes by the name
of the Jackalope he's a fellow hunter as
Thompson enthusiast he said you got to
read this book and so he he tells me to
read your book and empire of the summer
moon yes yeah and it was amazing I mean
he was absolutely right and it was so
good and I I made an Instagram post
about that there it is it's a fantastic
book there's so much good stuff in there
and I just it was it was so sad and so
gripping and so riveting and you we all
know that a lot of horrific things
happened in the time where the settlers
started making their way across the
plains and right headed west but God you
just did such a fantastic job of sort of
bringing it to life it's all those
things is brutal it's sad it's
incredibly dramatic it's it's I mean I
just think people forget about what the
frontier was it was kind of a nice idea
that you get on on TV or something but
it was it was a savage place anyway I
will ask I was trying to convey it with
this and with the minimum possible of
people being staked out on anthills with
their eyelids cut off and things like
that so there's a lot of that yeah I
mean that the horrors of it all it's
like foof
you know and I'd never see I had no I
knew that that kind of stuff had taken
place but I'd really never read it so
graphically depicted before before this
book what what motivated you to write
about all this so what what this is a
book about me I'm a Connecticut Yankee
Massachusetts Connecticut guy I moved to
Texas twenty-five years ago and and I've
been there ever since and I didn't know
anything about Texas history nothing
beyond whatever you might know about the
Alamo or something or Sam Houston or
somebody like that and I got there and I
just started to you know I started to
hear about what won the Great Plains and
what they were which was an alien
concept to me I wasn't sure what the
plains were or why they were different
than some other part of the country the
high plains and I came into this idea I
came upon this idea that the last
frontier was there that this is where it
all went down this is where like the end
of freedom and limitlessness it was it
didn't happen the frontier didn't push
forward until it got to California and
then hit the ocean California settled
the east settled and then there was this
one last place that did not and it went
on forever anywhere reasons for that one
of which was the most hostile Indian
tribes in the country another was that
it was there was no water water you know
there was basically only land no water
or timber but so I got into this and
then hello and behold there's this I
find out because I live in Texas that
there's this principle that lives on
this that lived on this land the
Comanches that determined everything
that happened in the American West
around them and that's not an
exaggeration they would they were
because until you know the West wasn't
one until they lost it and that was for
sure and so there were two things one
this arc of the rise and fall of the
most powerful tribe most influential
tribe in American history the Comanches
which was very cool from the Spanish and
the horse and all sorts of big stuff
that goes on and then in the middle of
that story was this little story of this
little nine year old girl was you know
blonde hair and cornflower blue eyes who
gets taken in a Comanche raid in 1836
who ends up becoming the you know mother
of the last and greatest chief of the
Comanches and in fact her kidnapping
and his surrender at the very end the
Comanches you know sort of bookend a 40
year war we never fought a 40 year
guesswork war against anybody except
them so I ran into this story and I'm
just the kid from Connecticut and it
just seemed like the most obvious book
in the world it was just the coolest
history it's a crazy story and I've
never heard of Cynthia Ann Parker before
now she's we have run your well we have
a giant a metal picture of her on the
walls because it was so powerful your
depiction of it - I wanted to I wanted
to find out what she looks like and what
is his name again Quan Quan so Quan Quan
Quan Oh what was his the name cover of
the book right he be because his mother
was Cynthia Ann Parker which was not
that didn't become that didn't come out
and no one found out that until he was
much older so he was born Quanah as a
Comanche later in the reservation period
when people found out who he was he
identified as part of the Parker family
also oh wow yeah so he as a famous
Comanche war chief and he was one of the
most famous and and feared he was Quanah
it's such a crazy story that they killed
so many people but occasionally they
would keep people and bring them into
the tribe right so there were rules of
the frontier at the time and we're
talking about how savage it was and the
rules of the at least of the Plains
Indians of which the Comanches were one
that if you were captured as an adult
male you were killed tortured to death
either quickly or slowly depending on
how much time they had if you were a
baby you were killed they couldn't deal
with the baby baby was they were nomads
and they were on their horse and they
were probably escaping from whatever
raid they had just done they couldn't
deal with babies a teenage girl or a
young woman would possibly be killed but
likely turned into a sort of a slave the
ones who had a chance of being adopted
into the tribe were the you know eight
nine ten eleven twelve year olds because
Comanches had trouble keeping their
numbers up and so they instinctively
kind of they would take these captives
and not just from you know white people
if from the Apaches
in the Utes in the Navajos and whoever
they might take them from and so what
was interesting about the frontier
though is that those rules applied so
long but forgetting forget about white
people arriving in the early 18th
century for the moment those rules had
applied to Indian tribes since forever
you know that was the assumption of a
raid they all had it was it was almost
like the golden rule in Reverse or the
golden rule do unto others they all
expected that kind of treatment none of
them were shocked when a baby was killed
or a pregnant woman was killed it took
the kind of the you know the angle
European civilization of you know newton
and leibniz in the biblical tradition to
arrive on the Texas frontier in 1830 and
be shocked at what they saw very
interesting very savage very brutal it
was a it was a culture of raiding
essentially this is the Comanche culture
in particular or the Comanche Americans
in general yeah well Native Americans in
general Plains Indians in general and
you know so Plains Indians we could kind
of start you know you would know the
names of the law of a lot of Arapaho and
Cheyenne and Sioux and these were people
who operated out in the great wide open
they were all masters of the horse what
made the Comanches special was that they
they became the preeminent horse tribe
now people forget that there weren't any
horses in this in in the continent until
the Spanish brought them in the
sixteenth century and so the the the
tribes that got the horse and mastered
the horse basically altered the entire
balance of power and the plains and the
tribe that got the horse better than
anybody else in terms of breaking and
breeding and saddling and riding and
stealing and hunting on the back of and
fighting with were the Comanches and
nobody was there Pierre and so this was
this was not just a Plains tribe it was
the preeminent power on the southern
plains did you know that horses
originally evolved here in North America
no and then they went exactly wedeck and
then they reintroduced them really the
Europeans did yeah there's a guy named
Dan Flores he's got a bunch of great
books and one of them is called coyote
America he's got another one
what is this other book about the the
various large land animals that went
extinct here in North America but that
the wolf and a lot of the other ones
wasn't concern Getty that's it
natural Les Halles yeah yeah he's
fantastic and essentially they all went
extinct all the horses went extinct here
and then they were reintroduced by
Europeans but they had originally
evolved here in Florida America I didn't
know so there's no but there's no
evidence that any of the native people
here really used them until Europeans
came whether it was Cortes or whoever
you know what Cortes with the Aztecs or
whoever else came across horses a horse
is so much a part of this story the you
know but so they come up with the
Spanish the Spanish are acutely aware of
what is going to happen if the horse
technology gets out and they take great
pains to not let it get out they don't
want to teach the Indians in Mexico or
the Indians in North America on how to
use them but inevitably the technology
does get out and then there's a few
moments there's a great moment in time
in 1680 in Santa Fe when there's a great
Pueblo Revolt and they kick the Spanish
out in like tens of thousands of horses
get out it's the great horse dispersal
and and and these are the horses that
come into the hands of the police Plains
tribes so it was in the 1600s that their
power and their dominance started to
serve itself begins of the Comanches
figure out how to have all these horses
and how how valuable that was or some of
the other tribes just hadn't kind of
caught on
no one knows and and it's it's
interesting no one knows that because
you it was only seen in flashes by the
Spanish through their kind of northern
outpost no one exactly knows what it was
you know in the heart and soul of a
Comanche that could do that better than
anybody else but in fact Comanches but
by all descriptions of the time were not
pre horse and they wait graceful people
they were kind of short and kind of you
know bowlegged and they they weren't
especially graceful and and they didn't
they didn't look like perhaps you would
have think of the the northern Sioux
Indians of the nig on the nickel I mean
that kind
if tall and you know with the bone
structure that wasn't the Comanches and
then they got on a horse and then
everything changed and and and even
though the Apaches were the first ones
to actually get that technology from the
Spanish and they crazed they raised
havoc with it but the tribe that got it
the best and the most were the Comanches
they were the tribe that actually ended
up supplying horses to a lot of the
Northern Plains tribes that we just
talked about and what they did with once
they had this incredible mastery of the
horse and this ability to hunt like they
never had and fight like they never had
they did what you would I guess expect
the great new power and the planes and
the planes are a big place by that I
mean the great new power of the place
it's got a challenge for the greatest
food source out in Mid America and that
was the buffalo herds and they were in
the southern plains
so the Comanches over a period of a
hundred and fifty years of sustained
combat moved south from the Wind River
mountains of Wyoming essentially into
this 250,000 square mile empire think of
kind of headquartered in the pick Texas
Panhandle which is where the buffalo
were and this tribe they were known for
being buffalo hunters and they were also
known that they weren't really like
making artwork or doing a lot of the
things that we sort of associate with
other Native American tribes or mostly
just hunting they were writing and
things that we all would associate with
Native Americans you know this wonderful
abilities and dance and music complex
religion and complex religious social
structures to go along with it and all
these different things music and dance
and all these things the Comanches by
the time that the kind of Anglo
Europeans run into them they are a
stripped-down culture that looks more
like Sparta and one of the reasons they
are is because they've been fighting
this long war primarily against the
Apaches but against other tribes over
decades and during that time as they
became ascendant militarily they became
less interested in those things they
became interested in war conveyed status
right war conveyed numbers of ponies and
status and
and so yes they were they were a
stripped-down war culture I guess to
whatever extent we know or something
about Sparta I would remind you of
Sparta that's what's so interesting
about it is is such a unique tribe just
a very unique branch of Native Americans
that was specifically like this they
made war and they and they conquered and
when you know when you think about what
they got themselves finally it's about I
said 250,000 square miles this probably
doesn't mean anything but think of West
Texas western Oklahoma western Kansas
eastern Colorado and eastern New Mexico
gigantic chunks of that that was theirs
and and when you think of the numbers of
them that were there when when say the
Anglo Europeans and the Americans came
through in the 1830s there was probably
25 or 30,000 of them out there of which
five or six thousand warriors now I
don't know what five or six thousand
suggests you but it suggests to me like
the third baseline at Yankee Stadium or
something it's not very many people
mm-hmm
you know occupying this gigantic area
that that became as we were saying
earlier determinants of everything that
happened around it well your depictions
of how the raid happened where Cynthia
Ann Parker got kidnapped and how all
these other various raids happened was
so terrifying because these people the
initial ones really kind of had no idea
what they were in for these are the
Parkers yeah yes so so the the core so
as I say that my books about the you
know the rise and fall the Comanches is
a tribe which we've been talking about
but then there's this little family the
Parkers and the Parkers did what so many
other Texans did and and this was the
crazy Americans who who moved across
their frontiers in ways that just were
they were beyond brave into foolhardy
I mean people if you look at say what
what happened in Canada or what the
Spanish did there was always that you
know the soldiers would ride in first
and set up the Presidio and then the
then the priests would come in and you
know the mission would be set up and
then the protections would be in place
and the institutions and then the people
would come in Texas it was just these
red
from Tennessee and Alabama coming
through with no protection of any kind
you know no there were no institutions
they were out beyond any form of
security or protection or institutions
and so this is what the Parkers were in
1830s they were about 90 miles south of
Dallas and you had Spanish in New Mexico
but but nothing but Comanches and
Apaches between where these people were
and and that so you know 800 miles of
nothing and and so what they had done is
they they had taken these head rights or
grants from Mexico which was which owned
Texas at that point they'd been given
about you know 20,000 acres worth which
is a kingdom from their point of view
and the Mexicans were giving them this
so that they could provide a buffer
against the Comanches basically
providing fresh meat for the Comanches
and so they built this little fort out
there out right at the end and it was it
was so cool it was not only out in the
middle of nowhere the absolute edge of
the frontier of the Indian frontier
where where it was in great danger
it was also right at a part where the
rainfall drops you know below 30 inches
where we go from the around the 98th
Meridian where we go from what we think
of as the east to the west where there's
no trees right which it happens right
there too
it also happens right that this this
raid in 1830 that started this out and
where the little blonde girl is taken
this also happens at a time when when
this gigantic Comanche Empire with 20
vassal states and no diplomatic
relations touches this westward booming
American Empire all these guys in
Washington were in suits and running
around that Empire is and they're
touching right at this point and neither
has any idea what the other one is the
Comanches have no idea that these Parker
family is sitting there attached in some
way to cities in the east and the
burgeoning Industrial Revolution they
would not know what that was by the same
token the the Americans coming West had
absolutely no clue that they just hid
they just did what they shouldn't have
done which was to push in to come
she territory it's so crazy that they
set them up like that oh so dark me but
it's it's just such a wild time too
I mean but also so recent I mean I'm 52
so we're talking about three of my
lifetimes three of my lifetimes ago it
was on like Donkey Kong down there just
crazy it's it's hard to believe that
that recently some unbelievably horrific
barbaric hand-to-hand combat killing
people and slaughtering entire villages
and other stuff that went back and forth
between the Native Americans between the
white settlers I mean it was just it's
unbelievable
it's one of the most what you just said
is one of the most striking things about
this to me and was when I the you know
that the Connecticut kid came to Texas
was that where I grew up
you know Indians had been well when I
say subdued usually killed off by white
man's diseases but if not by you know
bullets or treaties or something I mean
couple of hundred years before my
forebears ever got off the boat there
wasn't a frontier in memory anyway I
mean there were Indian tribes around and
I played baseball with some of them in
the summers and so forth I knew of them
but this was a really distant memory
okay get to Texas 1875 was when the last
of the Comanches came in and there was a
whole bunch of joseline on and off the
rez after that into the 20th century
yeah under so what he plus years ago yes
so we're talking within a really close
generational memory and and that's
what's really stunning and if you talk
to Tanana where are you from originally
just Boston so boss okay you and I okay
Boston was born in Jersey but did most
of my grown most of my family came from
Boston and so the the difference between
that and and what if you go to Texas
there's that there's an area west of
Fort Worth kind of Weatherford Palo
Pinto County Parker County now where you
can talk to people and they're still
talking about command Jesus it's it's
their great-grandfather was killed by
them Wow
so that's Texas and that's why it's so I
found it so striking
so really striking it's also striking
because you realize over the course of
the book and I mean just and then more
books that have
gotten into subsequently that this was
something that was going on before the
white settlers even got there that this
way of life and the rating and the the
killing and that's not what we associate
Native Americans with we associate with
us with taking the Native Americans land
and then them fighting back and that's
when things get ugly
but it turns out this was just a wild
way of life that they had had for who
knows how many years one of the things
that surprised people when I wrote this
book and I didn't know that I was going
to be surprising people because I was
just reporting what I found was was was
that that very thing that that this was
I think people are often used to the
burry my heart at Wounded Knee narrative
of the of Native Americans which is as
victims yeah and there's no question
that they were victims of a westward
rolling Empire and 378 broken treaties
and we can just go on and we know what
that narrative is like but the narrative
that I told was an era of power of
dominance of power which came with
brutality too and I think it surprised
it was a fact it was a fact that that if
you go back in time these indeed these
Native American tribes that eventually
got crushed as the Comanches did and put
on a reservation somewhere and had their
livelihood taken away from them but you
know it really anyway it's just it's a
it's a huge deal and and a narrative
that I think to me that doesn't take
into account the enormous power and
dominance and behavior of Comanches is
just missing you know half the half the
narrative well it's so fascinating
because it's essentially they were
living like Stone Age people and they
were doing it very recently they were
they were doing it like in terms of the
way Europe is you could go and see
buildings in Italy that were built long
before any of this stuff happened long
before the settlers started encountering
them and they were living like this and
this sort of it's very romantic
the way they live just chasing the
Buffalo and threeway and killing them
and then eating only Buffalo me
then doing very little farming picking
some berries and nuts and that's about
it I mean it was just eating meat and
raiding and killing if they were they
were hunter-gatherers yeah they were
nomadic hunter-gatherers yeah which is
what they were and and what the horse
allowed them to do was to which is what
they had been before the horse allowed
them to do that only just really really
really well in other words they were
they weren't in a position of becoming
agricultural Indians the horse gates and
this ability to and as you said that
they got everything from the Buffalo
clothing and lodging and and tools and
saddles and bridles and food I mean
everything came from the Buffalo so the
horse just enabled them to do this an
incredibly sophisticated level it's the
most sad part of the story is the extra
painting of the Buffalo I mean that's
not the most sad but one of the that
their way of life it's almost like you
know what happened but I'm rooting for
them in some weird way you know I mean I
know that they're not gonna win but
there's something about the way they
lived it seems so exciting this and the
other thing it was the way you described
Cynthia Ann Parker post being air-quote
rescued like how badly she wanted to go
back to the Comanche and how she missed
the way they looked at the world that
the world was in many ways there was so
much magic involved in the way the
Comanche viewed the sky and the ground
and that there was gods that were
looking out for them and that they could
literally have magic going into battle
like all this the the romance of this
nomadic lifestyle was that's what she
wanted and like when you talked about
that one guy that spoke Comanche and
that she meets him and she's like please
take me take me with you yeah it's crazy
it was so she was she was taken about
the age of I guess it was nine and then
she was with the Comanches for 24 years
she completely assimilated she married a
war chief she had three children she
they tribe you know at two different
times they knew where she was Indian
agents figured out where she was and
they they they made a push to get her
back because the idea generally was to
get captives back
she wouldn't go and then suddenly in a
raid purely by accident she's captured
in 1860 and is dragged back and she has
to show that she's white so that they
don't kill her right right she has to
show that she's a woman and and white so
that they don't kill her she she barely
escapes from that but she ends up being
you know forcibly reassimilated so
here's someone who completely
assimilated once with great success
and then in in her 30s now she's taken
back into this white culture and in fact
they put her up in a they were so
astounded to see her because she was
indians worth the cleanest people in the
world I mean her her job was to kind of
you know tan buffalo hides so she heard
kind of greasy looking and you know it
didn't look like a white farm
you know white god-fearing farm woman
from from Dallas but they put her up on
a you know on a pedestal with her
daughter and they kind of looked at her
and stared at her as this kind of this
strange object the white squaw who
wouldn't return this kind of object of
curiosity and then she gets kind of
shuffled ever deeper into the East Texas
piney woods and ever farther away from
her her people and she never assimilate
it was interesting she was she having
assimilated once brilliantly she was
asked in effect to do it again and she
couldn't and she never did but going
back for just one moment to something
you said was this idea of this kind of
freedom and magic there was in Comanche
and it was it was all there it was this
it was this world that was suffused with
magic everywhere you looked there was
magic and everything and but one of the
things that also was and this was this
was relayed by actually male captives of
the Comanches now the Comanches had a
very flat hierarchical organization or a
very flat hierarchy there was like it
may be a war chief in a civil chief but
there was really no there were no priest
clans and hierarchies there was it was
just flat and if you were a quante Park
or a young warrior and and you wanted to
get together a raid on the youths you
could just do it it was just you could
do what you wanted to do
and so you look at these what does one
particular captive was talking about
this and he was talking about being 15
years old this is before the Comanche
men had to fight and really hunt they
could they could do some hunting and but
they weren't yet in the full
responsibility of men there they are
sitting there they've got no
responsibilities except to go hunt and
have fun and go swimming and learn how
to become the greatest riders in the
world they've got no institution around
them of any kind they've got and you
start to think of why do people go west
you know away from institutions away
from things that we're going to make
them less free and so you I looked at
and I described it this way a 15 year
old Comanche boy may have been like the
freest thing that ever existed in in
America and I can feel the pull you know
yeah I think we all can I mean when we
were kids growing up you know you didn't
we played cowboys and Indians you know
and a lot of people wanted to be Indians
you wanted to wear those kind of Native
American jackets with the frill and
there was so so much of that that was
attractive to us and that was a big part
of it was that they were free you know
Dances with Wolves obviously and you
know when Kevin Costner gets assimilated
into that tribe there's something
exciting about it like it's more noble
it's thought to be like a more powerful
alternative to this Western grind and
and and again you're just you're out
there and and and you are beyond the
reach of any of the normal institutions
that we think about school and work and
job and government and religion and
church and all the things that bind
people in and most people are happy to
be bound by them but but many people
aren't and I thought that this there was
an idea of the West of kind of limitless
freedom this west of the predates barbed
wire and private property and and that
just seemed I don't know I still find
it's just one of the most appealing
things to think about there and just the
fact that it's so recent that's what's
really crazy really talking about the
urban sprawl and barbed wire and things
along those lines I mean and it's
particularly in Texas where
everything's almost private-property I
mean this giant ranches everywhere and
this was all run by the Comanche 98% of
Texas is unlike if you go one one state
to the west and you'll you're it that
you're in the big land public land
government land states Texas is 98
percent private now that's a weird thing
isn't it it is it's very strange how'd
that happen well it it happened because
that's the way it settled and and the
the public land States just there was
for one thing there was a lot more of
apparently a sort of useless land in in
the in the western states but anyway yet
it happened and in Texas you're lucky to
get yourself a state park here and there
when you were doing research for this
did you meet with any current Comanches
I met with some of them and I know some
of them some of them are on my on my
website um but as far as interviewing
them for things that happened two or
three hundred years ago that's not
really a sort of a non-starter as a
historian although although the book
itself is based on lots and lots of
interviews with Comanches but of the era
people who this is this was the great
there was some great projects done in
the 20s and 30s with Comanches who
talked about you know who had memories
of the 19th century and so a lot of what
we know with it's in my book that we
know about the Comanches and who they
are come from all of these interviews
and there's a lot in my book that comes
from Comanches but again of the era so
you know I just figured that
interviewing people today about things
that have a long time ago was probably
not that efficient no for sure not that
efficient but still to me would be kind
of fascinating to see where they are now
I mean the the Native American
reservations in this country have
traditionally been pretty horrific and
it's very depressing and sad and for the
people that lived there just so so
little hope and so little opportunity
and it's it's oh as you were talking
about before the broken treaties and
just to see them having gone from being
this incredible warlike tribe to being
resigned to these very small patches of
land that are usually not very fruitful
not very resource filled and that
happened to a lot of tribes
if you look at the Comanches the
Comanches are pretty small tribe they're
they they they're located in their
center although there's no reservations
you know there's no excuse me all right
yeah they don't have a yell under the
flue they don't have a reservation there
but they there I'd say the last number I
heard was 14,000 or something like that
one of the big I guess ironically in
some ways determinant factors in how
wealthy a tribe is now is proximity to a
major urban area for example Chickasaws
and Choctaws are in range of DFW so
their casinos there make a lot of money
the Seminoles in Florida there are some
tribes in California who are making a
lot of money if you go up to say some of
the Sioux reservations you know well up
north on the plains they're not near
they just did there they're the lands
their traditional lands just don't
happen to be close to urban centers yeah
urban centers and so there's a little
bit of that going on there but yeah
that's they this is just you know where
where we the US government put the
Indians and and in terms of Plains
Indians and Comanches and Arapahos and
Cheyenne's and Sioux and everybody else
they never wanted to be farmers they
farming was exactly what they never
wanted to do and even if you gave them
160 acres they would they would sublet
it they would rent it out to - usually a
white farmer who would farm it and they
would take a sharecropping percentage or
something but yes so they they didn't
want anything to do with that and and
above all they didn't want to be forced
into a type of life that they that they
had never done before and considered it
just kind of unseemly
so do Comanches have a reservation today
no no reservation at all well the the
problem is the way this is going to get
into a lot of detail but I mean Oklahoma
they basically they they in favor of in
place of reservations they gave out
individual apportionments of land and
had them ascend so where I work for
example where I came from in the East
Coast there are reservations if you go
to say Colorado you'll go to
see the ute reservation was some of the
Sioux Reservation Sue's reservations all
over the place not in Oklahoma wow so
they're in danger of having their
culture probably get it erased there
pretty I mean I think they would they
would tell you I mean I want to speak
for Comanches or anybody else but that
they're that they're you know they're
they're pretty strongly organized where
they are they they have a nation they do
have a nation is just they don't have a
body of a reservation but they do have a
nation but if they have a nation they
don't have the same sort of laws that
one have a relevation know they actually
do so if you go for example I spent some
time with the Chickasaws a few years ago
it's incredible now they don't have a
quote reservation either but they have
they have little pieces of land that is
theirs but they also have a completely
parallel police system completely
parallel legislature they have parallel
healthcare systems and you can and you
can drive through these parts of
Oklahoma where I don't say Choctaws or
some or Cherokees or whoever they may be
are and there are these whole parallel
worlds they're existing right in front
of you and you don't see them Wow there
yes so no I actually I think they're in
a lot of ways a lot of the tribes in
Oklahoma are doing well but you even you
literally can drive through it and you
you wouldn't be able to tell it's just
such a stunning amount of change that
happen to this continent over a short
relatively short period of time yeah I
mean really astounding and and if you
look at what from from the moment that
the last Comanche surrendered with Quan
when quanta and the the last of the
starving have a had all the Buffalo have
been killed now and so they're they're
coming in and it's 1875 you know that
very year their old kind of Maine I
guess camping ground would be Palo Duro
Canyon one of the biggest canyons in the
American West up in the Texas Panhandle
and that's kind of where their their
sanctuary was or one of their big
sanctuaries worth within that very year
white men already owned Palo Duro Canyon
there was already a ranch on it it was
already private property within a few
years there's barbed wire going
all the way up I mean it this is
happening I mean so in other words you
have you have the transfer of ownership
suddenly white people own the land that
the Indians used to used to be theirs
right the second thing that happens is
now we have the cattle drives just
before barbed wire and then there's only
a few years of cattle drives and then
the barbed wire goes up and this happens
with just breathtaking speed and I mean
from really the moment that they started
killing the Buffalo off in the what
eighteen seventy or something 1871 - I
mean full barbed wire it's just it's
less than a couple decades it's such a
great story and then the the fact that
this young girl Cynthia Ann Parker gets
kidnapped and gives birth to this man
who eventually becomes the last great
Comanche chief and literally watches the
entire empire change and shift into this
what we now call Western world yep he
rides in Teddy Roosevelt's inaugural
parade that was also what's crazy about
the book like that he meets Teddy and he
has a speech with him on stage and this
is all I mean he had killed all a lot of
white people to write a lot of settlers
he didn't talk about it but yes he had
this is because that's what Comanches
did yeah well so wise of him also did
not talk about right and not only
Comanches he but he was he fought
Indians he fought anybody that's out
there but yes he didn't he didn't spend
a lot of time bragging about that yeah I
mean I guess it's just the way they felt
about war what is this Jaime at the
parade
oh here's the parade there's another one
he is but there's six of them in the
parade Wow and what year is this over
1908 Oh 8 I think oh what a insane
relationship that must have been for
those people to be experiencing first of
all these enormous cities and going
through Washington DC on horseback and
now knowing what you had come from and
what a catastrophic Titanic change had
taken place inside of your lifetime and
now you're experiencing something that
you didn't even think was possible and
it's the the new law of the land is that
it does look like kkona doesn't it in
the middle
but I mean he and he was you know he was
not just ceremonial Indian I mean he he
was a brilliant man and he one of the
things he did is he went to New York
I mean went to Washington and he
testified and there were all these there
were all these hearings trying to figure
out how much land Indians were going to
get and quantum tors testified this and
actually it's quite brilliant I put his
testimony in my book he's just flat
brilliant he sort of runs circles around
the senator who's questioning him so but
he would so he played an active role too
but there he is as you said he's sitting
in a committee room in Congress I mean
this guy who was this great free warrior
on the plains now how long did it take
you to research this I you know I did
this partly while I was at a day gig so
I'm not really sure probably three or
four years something like that there
isn't as much as you would think because
and the reason is I mean there's a fair
amount and it's all in Texas which is
good um but there is one curious thing
about writing about Native Americans is
that they don't they didn't write
anything down so so if you're writing
about say Winston Churchill I mean you
can track him from like his bath in the
morning to his seventh note to ask would
and is know to ask with to to his notes
to his wife to all of his proceedings in
Parliament and everything he ever did
it's like moment by moment you take
someone like Kawana out on the plains
and you've got pretty much nothing and
so which you have what you do have are
you know flashes that are seen by say
this the Spanish originally or the
French or Mexicans or Texans and
Americans as they come through you're
seeing them in flashes as they're
presented to because there are no parish
records there's no legal records there's
no interviews there's no things like
that that's so stunned yeah it's so
stunning but that's one of the weirdest
things about where they are today in
2019 this idea that they don't have
really a reservation or specific giant
chunk of land that's theirs they sort of
preserve at least some of this history
ya know it's um it was a peculiarity of
Oklahoma that that that it went that way
because there are other states as we
talked to better
who have large large reservations to
this day but yeah so it's it's so and
when you get if you're writing about
them when you get to sort of the the
post reservation period so let's say
into the 1880s 1890s the the world does
change in terms of things are being
written down quanta you know quanta
becomes a big part of his society's
settling up cattle leasing deals he's
founding a school board I mean he does
all these things that you know that you
wouldn't necessarily think a glorious
chief of the Comanches would do but he
does those things and and those are very
trackable I mean you know exactly what
he's doing and you can research them and
in conventional ways I was fascinated by
the peyote rituals to know was that a
natural normal part of Comanche life or
is this something that he adopted from
other tribes he he adapted it from
something that had gone on on the border
on the Mexican border but if he became
the founder of the Native American
church which had a peyote ritual in
which he and it became famous for and so
there was if there was this great a
place I would really like to go back to
in American history would be to quanah's
house Kawana got his cattlemen buddies
to build him you first of all he wanted
the US government to build in the house
because con it was
hustler and could I please have a house
they say you can't have house so he went
to his cattlemen buddies and they built
in this house magnificent house and
Willie 4,500 square feet double porch
with these giant white stars in the roof
it became known as satis house right
there that's star house it's falling
down but now but yes and in its heyday
it looked really so that still exists to
this day it does and it's about to fall
down and they feel owns it well this guy
who lives in cash or Lawton Oklahoma and
who doesn't who has been unwilling to
accept help or money from everybody from
the Comanche nation - that's it right
there there's always had the stars yeah
yeah it did because he saw that US
generals had these stars and their
colors and he wanted he wanted like more
than they had
Wow and but that's that's this sits
there in cash Oklahoma no no I've been
in it but but it's gotten so beat up now
that they've they don't let you go in
and anymore bill sits there so so that
we had so as long as we have that there
in 1895 if you went there needs I say
early 1890s you it would have been one
of the most amazing scenes we had people
like Geronimo coming to dinner Roosevelt
came to dinner and Nelson miles the
great general came to dinner he had a I
think it was a Swiss Mexican cook he had
six wives he had 19 21 children 19 who
grew to adulthood the house is full of
kids
it would have been surrounded by lodges
and the reason it would have been as
because people his own tribe had come in
and for help you money or pay for a
funeral or orab or going back to the
peyote a peyote ritual which is a
healing ritual and so you would have
seen one of the great scenes in the
American West and and people went when
he died in 1911 people found out that
he'd given most of his money away in to
all these people who had come in asking
for his help he had in fact helped them
and given most of his cattle ranching
money away that he had made now this
house is owned by one individual yes and
so but it's a historical landmark and no
one's preserving it they're not doing
anything to you know it I don't know all
the details of it but it's owned by
Wayne Gibson and his sister as far as I
know still and they've owned it for a
while they don't want any help it was
that house was put into an amusement
park years ago to preserve it that was
owned by Wayne's uncle as far as I know
and so taken apart it was was it taken
apart I don't know they did move it
though they moved so this is not the
original location where it says right
now the original location was out on
what turned out to be later to be a Fort
Sill gunnery artillery range and so they
they moved it and so quanah's a daughter
I guess it was moved it down into cache
and then it was moved one more time into
this amusement park literally that when
I went into this amusement park it was
like something out of a I don't know a
Spielberg movie I mean you go I was told
the house was back there and I couldn't
really believe it but so we go in and
you're going by these deep
dolt in rollercoasters that are all
overgrown with vines like Sleeping
Beauty's castle you know and and there's
cows everywhere and and and rides and
carousels all grow all overgrown and
then you go through a series of houses
that were also moved there like Frank
James's house or something and keep
going keep going
in the back there that thing was the
house was sitting there now it is his he
owns it
he's been approached as I said by all
sorts of different people consortiums of
people with money who want to buy it or
or just save it you know from literally
the Comanche nation I know has wanted to
and Texas Tech has and some Dallas
people and any number of people and so
the to my knowledge thus far he refuses
to sell or or to take their help was
that him right there I think it is
that's him wait wait wait Gibson yeah
yeah hey so he's a perfectly nice guy
it's it's a he feels the house is very
special in his family and it is indeed
very special but he won't the last time
the last tour I got with him as you're
going up the main stairwell there was a
four foot by six inch hole in the main
in the roof above the main stairwell I
mean you can't really have a four foot
by six inch hole no there is so right
and the rain would just come through and
but so can you do to preserve a house
like this while still leaving it the way
it is so it's you know I'm saying like
you would have to replace the wood now
if you replace the wood is it still the
same house like there's arguments about
boats yeah they've found some ancient
boats and they've done some rebuilding
of these boats now also you're looking
at new wood and the shape of this old
boat like what is it visit what is it
yeah
so I tell you the first time I walked in
there which was 15 years ago you
wouldn't have needed to do that much
work to it 15 years ago yeah you would
not have needed to do what it needed
some bolstering for sure in the
foundation what it needed some work but
it has gone way downhill because
nothing's been done to it so now I don't
know what but when I walked in there you
you really could have a good carpenter
and you know carpenter team
a month you could have shirred that
Jesus Christ yeah that's so sad yeah and
I don't know how much of it I mean a lot
of it was the problem was with all those
holes in it and stuff it started to rot
and rot because rod is different than ya
you know and then you would have to
actually really replace that wood so at
the end of the day was going to be a
certain percentage I was gonna be new
but at least you could sort of get a
semblance of what it was and do your
best to sort of prove you had like a
real good architect on hand and a real
good engineer and someone from some sort
of historical society where they could
look at it and say okay this is what we
want to maintain as much of this old
stuff as possible while making sure this
thing can last for more people to see it
I think they could still do that but I
have a memo expert but it's a there's
plenty of it that you can save and
there's things like you know that
where's that famous it's in my book it's
a picture of the table Kiwanis table
there and you've got the tin ceiling
that's still there and the floorboards
are still there and those are all the
same you know the same stuff so I don't
know I know expert on it but until the
owner because it's his until the owner
decides to do something to it come on
bro what's his name
I think it's Wayne Gibson Gibson come on
Wayne it's ridiculous he's a lovely guy
I'm sure he doesn't he just doesn't want
to do that this is a shape to where the
wing yeah giant part of history I mean
and particularly after you read this
story read your book it's just so much
more interesting you know that mean that
was the end
that was when this guy had become a
cattleman that's when this guy had sort
of assimilated into not not just
assimilated become incredibly successful
and you know I want to say Western but
Western meaning you know the United
States it's not really what I keep using
that word probably incorrectly what is
the word to use when he was assimilate
Eastern no was settler culture like what
what would you say when they assimilated
to white man's world I would you just
say that the white man's world
I suppose I guess the white man's world
is probably this way Anglo European
culture that had come West but yeah very
much the white man's world the fact he
become a cattleman
and become it was hilarious to that they
wanted him to not have so many wives
they didn't wanted to have the wives and
they didn't want to have hit the you
know the braids the long long braids I
didn't didn't like that didn't like the
wives he quanta did things his own way
he also played politics brilliantly he
mean he understood from the early going
that that quote the chief of the
Comanches was going to be appointed by
the commander at Fort Sill you know it
wasn't just going to happen and there
were all sorts of candidates jostling
for this and he made sure that it was
him that didn't make him any less the
leader of his tribe it didn't make him
any less of an independent person who
the white men had to deal with but he
made sure he had that one buttoned up
and he was challenged continuously I
mean there was there were continuous
challenge to him it's interesting
historically that you don't hear about
him and the Comanches when it played
such a significant part in taking over
the West and settling the West but you
hear about Crazy Horse you hear about
Sitting Bull you hear about the the
Sioux and the Apaches you don't hear
that much about the Comanches and you
don't hear much about Quanah Parker no
it was one of the great pleasures of
writing this book is that the these were
largely unknown things
I mean if you Quanah was one of them
another another discovery was you know
every we all know about certain people
running around San Antonio in the 1830s
je Davy Crockett would come to mind but
we don't know about Jack Hayes the
world's greatest you know the Ranger the
guy who sort of invented this anti
Comanche warfare invented the repeating
you know he first needed an invent but
he first used the repeating five-shot
pistol and then of course had a hand in
the invention of the six-shooter
but you know everybody should know who
Jack Hayes is everybody should know I
mean Kawana
was I mean Geronimo is Geronimo and he's
famous largely for one particular
particular breakout in the late 19th
century but you know Quanah was arguably
the greater man in in the reservation
period and I mean Geronimo in some ways
was kind of a was kind of a curmudgeon
yeah that was another part that I wanted
to get to was Jack Hayes and the
creation of the Texas Rangers so we
think of the Texas Rangers today
think of like Chuck Norris yeah you know
you really don't realize that they were
essentially a group that was created to
effectively combat the Comanche exactly
that's where they came from
it's amazing the story when when you
talk about how it took like sort of
several iterations of these guys with
before they figured out how to do it
right and the guys that came out there
essentially a lot like like a lot of
depictions of Navy SEALs like renegades
yeah like wild rugged rebels and there
they are there's the original Texas
Rangers is that Jack Hayes in their
military very as their case is well the
the lightest picture that's him that's
right yes oh hey so the thing was of
okay San Antonio in the 1830s late 1830s
you have you have about 2,000 residents
it's the kind of the out the final
outpost on the frontier and what what's
happening is Texas which now owns the
Texas which now owns Texas having won
its independence is giving out what they
call head rights so if you want to get
ahead right meaning free land so all you
had to do to get your free land outside
of San Antonio was go survey the land so
I had to do you had you know home and so
the surveyors would go out and survey it
and the Comanches would kill them in
ever more imaginative ways because the
Comanches understood exactly that the
instruments did steal the land the
instruments were the mechanism of the
theft of the land from them and so part
the deal was to keep how can you keep
your surveyors alive and Hayes was
originally a surveyor but he eventually
just got good at keeping other surveyors
alive and these guys who could do that
eventually became known as Rangers and
they evolved as Comanche fighters if we
know fighting like Comanches did I mean
they learned bird signs to track people
they would you know make cold camps I
mean you never made a warm you never
made a campfire if you were around
Comanches I mean they would they would
they learned these these techniques and
techniques of warfare
and they got really good at it they've
just had this one problem and the
problem was that they had three shots
yet Kentucky long rifle bang a and two
single-shot pistols and that's all they
had against Comanches who I would
encourage all of your listeners to go
and and look up this guy Lars Anderson
on the Internet yeah he's the he's the
bow guy yeah okay so in him of what he
what he proved among other he went back
and he just researched it and a lot of
the things that I frankly found hard to
believe about Comanches once I saw the
Anderson videos you believe them yes
Anderson can I think it's ten arrows in
five seconds he there's no such thing as
a quiver you're holding it as a bunch in
your harm here I mean but all these
things that we you know we heard that
the Comanches could do underneath the
horse's neck and rapidity of fire and
you and no one's ever Comanches never
stood in one place and closed one eye as
shot and they never once did that they
were moving both eyes open anyway look
at the Anderson video it's really cool
but what that meant was that Jack Hayes
and the Rangers were at an enormous
disadvantage you know and then lo and
behold he yeah well cut to the East
Coast this inventor named Samuel Colt
had come up in the in the early 1830s
with a prototype of a it was a it was a
really ingenious little pistol it was a
five shot pistol made and eventually
made in Paterson New Jersey and it is
right there
yeah is that the Paterson Colt this is a
five shot chamber that was popping up
with the same guy so yeah doesn't look
like the Paterson coat but anyway it's a
five shot it's a five shot thing with
with revolving cylinders and as a great
idea right absolutely nobody wanted it I
mean it was it was like a sidearm for
cavalry but the u.s. didn't have a
cavalry so it didn't really work out for
some reason Mirabeau Lamar the president
of Texas ordered a hundred and eighty of
these things and they can they found
their way to Texas the five-shot
Paterson Colts and somehow Jack Hayes
and his guys found out about them and
they got ahold of them they try
and they immediately understood what it
meant it meant equalizing the warfare
against the Comanches it meant because
now they had they had a five shots or
one interchangeable cylinder now ten ten
shots in Eastern pistol now so in close
hand combat the world changed and and
not only did that world change but
eventually everybody was so stunned by
what by this development that the US
government ordered a lot of what what
ended up being Walker called
six-shooters for the Mexican War Colt
becomes one of the richest men in
America and basically Jack Hazen Rangers
redefined warfare which is which is and
people said this about Jack Hayes and
it's broadly speaking true before Jack
Hayes you know people came into the West
on foot carrying a Kentucky long rifle
and after Jack Hayes they came mounted
in carrying a six-shooter yeah that was
the other thing that was really shocking
was that the US soldiers would try to
get off their horse to engage right
right because they didn't think you
fought mount the only people who fought
mounted were the Plains Indians I mean
you know nobody thought you've fighting
mounted was not something anybody did if
you if you used a horse you used it in
the Dragoon Way which is you would ride
to where you were gonna fight get off
the horse and then fight the black
Comanches were fully Mountain Rangers
were fully mounted and what they what
they used the Texas Rangers for in the
Mexican War which is they were there was
this terrible guerrilla problems and
these Rangers just went and cleared out
these whole areas and nobody had seen
this type of warfare before nobody had
seen this kind of ability to fight and
move and move mounted and move with
these well and nobody had ever seen
these what these Walker cult sees five
pound hand cannon six shooters that they
had nobody had seen those either and so
these crazy these these Rangers that
dressed any way they wanted to you know
sometimes with no shirts on and Serapis
and crazy hats I mean there was just the
Rangers there everybody was scared to
death of it do we know the history of
the bow and arrow amongst the Native
Americans do we know when it was first
implemented I'm not an expert on it
I mean I I don't know because I don't
know if other if the way the Lars
Anderson style of shooting of keeping
all the the arrows and the fingers that
he researched did he research that from
Native Americans or was that ever
utilized in Europe or anywhere else his
researches I think he started and I'm
not an expert on him either but I think
he started with other I mean he started
reading about you know anybody who were
you know who were archers and famous for
it and descriptions of them and I
believe I'm sure that that did include
Native Americans but it was no it was a
whole he looked at the whole world and
so do you think Native American well we
don't know but I'm just speculating did
Native Americans develop this ability
independently or did they did they learn
it from anyone else like it seems
interesting that they were livings
particularly the Comanches this
incredible nomadic life and didn't
really have a lot of interaction with
other people from other places so for
the first interaction from from anywhere
else was 16th century Spain yeah yeah
and there's there's no that that's the
that's the first interaction with
Europeans so the question is did the
boat come over in the land bridge didn't
I I mean I don't know that I really not
my field but no of course it's just it's
so interesting because I don't know that
style of multiple shooting of being able
to shoot so many hours in a row had been
input I don't think it was implemented
by the Europeans maybe the Mongol did
they have I don't know the question
though the more the question you're
getting at is how did the Comanches in
particular because when when these Dodge
and cattle and these various people saw
Comanches in Texas in 1830s they just
flat couldn't believe what they were
looking at they they couldn't believe
their abilities with horses breaking
them yeah I'd never seen anything like
it before I'd never seen anything like
it no saddle either right now the ad the
other they did have a cell yeah I think
that was part of the Spanish technology
very very very minimal you'll see it
museums but do you say you can find one
of those yeah I'm a Spanish saddle or
anyway but yeah they they had and but
particularly the the shoe
there it is right there Wow very minimal
minimal yes and one of the ways they
could shoot underneath the the the neck
of the horse was to hang a thong off
side of one of the saddles but a thong
well loop a leather loop a leather loop
that would allow them because otherwise
they they would need to be supported as
they came down underneath them there
were fairly small people they were they
were fairly small people so they're like
they would kind of climb off the saddle
and hang on the side on this side full
gallop full gallop shooting under the
neck accurately arrows that would kill a
man at 30 yards underneath the neck but
people so the question there I don't
know the answer to that and I don't know
that anyone does what the white men saw
just absolutely floored them with
abilities with arrows and among other
things they would you know they would
make the Indian would ask the Indian
voice they set up a dime in a tree or a
coin and they go okay now here you stand
here and like close your eyes and aim
and hit that the Comanche boy would miss
it by the foot look at that picture
right there of them do that's Aristotle
underneath the so basically using the
horse as a shield yeah yeah that's the
whole idea
Wow and there and and if you see them
from the other side I've seen trick
riders do this you can't even see them
mmm from the other side of the horse and
again this was something that you know
trick riders after you know in the Wild
West shows and beyond would do these
sorts of things but I'm sorry so I'll go
back to what you're saying so when they
were standing still oh so where the
Comanche boy asked him to like shoot
that dime and you can see boy wouldn't
hit I mean he was he was - he was
playing by their rules they wanted him
to stand and aim and whatever and again
if you see the Lars Andersson videos
there was no such thing as closing one
eye there was no such thing almost as
standing still and shooting it was
constant movement it was you know
shooting from movement wherever they
were going so and so so we can hear it
that way so it was sort of like the
member in Butch Cassidy and the Sundance
Kid where they say here Sundance try to
hit that and and you know Sundance Kid
shoots at it and misses it and then on
his way out he moves he says you mind if
I move or something or I'm better
if I move it's the same deal yeah it was
all about movement and it was never
about anything stationary mm-hmm anyway
so you know that that dancer I have no
idea how they they got good at that
right that's why it's a real shame that
they don't have a written history yeah I
mean that's one of many many things
that's a real shame that they don't have
a written history because it's and I
would have loved to have seen someone be
able to do that I mean God what how
incredible would it be to see what what
it looked like to see them I mean we're
just we just missed the motion picture
by 6070 here's gonna think they were
doing it for hundreds hundreds and
hundreds use it's almost like just too
magical to capture sorry it's gone
you have gone right before you'd invent
a camera no at least we have some photos
some still photos we do and we have and
I put in pretty big chunks of text into
my book of people of the time who saw
them and to describe it yeah that's all
you can do is yeah this just what they
saw and how astounded they were we must
have been pretty excited when you saw
that Lars Anderson guy oh yeah because
you know I pull that guy up show up pull
up a video of that guy so we could watch
it because it is pretty amazing and
because I mean I it's not that I didn't
believe what I was reading but on some
level it's hard to believe that they can
do what the people said they could do
it's interesting because this guy gets
hated on a lot in the archery community
it's very funny because you know they
say that a lot of what he's doing is
tricks and a lot always doing is
nonsense and you know it's not really
true that people actually did that but
watch him do it yes I said okay ma'am I
mean unless that's a trick I mean he's
clearly doing what he's saying he's
doing there's no if ands or buts about
it yeah are they tricks in terms of like
is it something that like maybe wouldn't
be as effective but it's really cool to
see yeah for sure but so what so what
he's still showing you yeah he's showing
you that you can do things I mean but is
he throws a ball and then shoots look at
he shoot it was look at that he shoot it
in the head with his people also the
rate of discharge which was one of the
things I had trouble believing he when
you see him shoot he's just yeah one
every time
throws it catches it and he can shoot an
arrow like after right after he catches
it look at that how he throws something
in the air and then shoots two shots -
he throws it in the air and then by the
time it hits the ground he hits it twice
means incredible and he's really
accurate with this thing he also one of
his cases is that you know that he is
always moving it's continuous movement
he never he doesn't close one eye he
doesn't stand still he is moving all the
time yeah where he goes which is what he
said was a trademark of the great the
Magyars and the great you know Archer
cultures look at this jumps in the air
gets off an arrow before he hits the
ground I mean amazing and he's even
catching arrows and then shooting them
back like anybody that says that what
he's doing is nonsense is a fool like
look he's mainly doing it you're in you
are an archer yeah archery range back
then okay so you've got it I'm a bow
under yeah well okay that's how this is
really impressive stop for me I don't
shoot traditional archery I shoot a
compound bow with a sight and I can line
it up to the exact yardage and all that
stuff but but I know enough to know that
what this guys doing it's pretty special
so he's showing arrows in the quiver
versus arrows in his hand how he can
just grab him and pull him right so his
his case is that we all think that it's
a quiver right he says nobody nobody was
any good ever used to quiver you can
transport them in a quiver but in battle
you're holding them in a bunch of a
clustered bunch in your hand I was
saying these people here in these
ancient depictions the actual drawings
from you know hundreds of years ago of
the way he did it
holding the arrows in his draw hand and
so he can do it very quickly
really interesting it is really and this
is probably I mean because of this one
gentleman it's probably the only way
we're really gonna know that this was
possible cuz no one else is doing
anything like this guy look at this guy
he's doing drive-bys on a back of a bike
and he hits I mean back that up again so
you could see that because that is
insane watch how he's doing this
right there I mean three times he hits
in in a second he hits three targets on
a bike as he's riding by which would
emulate a horse other
difference between the elevation change
you know you go up and down on a horse
but that was the other thing about like
the stories of the Mongols that they had
developed an ability to shoot as the
horses in the air because it wouldn't
like the the stomping oh I say hubs
would during that part so as the horse
was up that's when they would release so
it would have the least amount of impact
on their their accuracy pretty
incredible stuff but it's one of the
things that made Comanches Comanches the
mastery of the horse Plus that would now
combine with this ability to shoot from
from a moving horse now did they have a
particular prowess with archery that was
was known amongst Native Americans what
was extraordinary
amongst other tribes I don't know that
for a fact but I do know the reaction of
people who saw them who had seen plenty
of other Indians nobody had ever seen
anything like it at the time now was
there a group in of Northern Plains
Indians that could do I don't know but
but the reaction was almost universal by
people who had seen a lot of Indian
tribes and you know they'd never seen
that before someone needs to make a
movie yeah you know I mean someone
really is someone really needs to make a
movie about Cynthia Ann Parker about
Quanah about the Comanche just about
what it must have been like for these
poor hapless settlers that didn't know
they're being used as a meat buffer you
know the whole story mean well you know
Warner Brothers has been working on this
for nine years so yeah I would maybe one
day we can't they came very as I
understand it very soon this book came
out nine years ago right so that's when
Warner Brothers was right and the first
screenwriter was Larry McMurtry it was
very famous you know if you had to pick
a screenwriter who would be Larry
McMurtry and Hollywood well you know
you're in the middle of the you're in
the belly of the beast here you know
what it's like it it Hollywood is just
does what it does I mean there are two
modes here I think hair on fire and
glacier and I've been through both of
them maybe we get your hair on fire
again but we know we've got a great
screenplay now and I did I didn't write
but you know Derek C and Frances the
director has been happy with the dog I
am extremely I didn't think it was
possible to do a two-hour movie about
that yeah
so what they did is they basically made
it about McKenzie in quanta it's just
flat brilliant so and I think as as I'm
told
even though I wasn't part of it they
came pretty close last summer to doing
this but the budget was too high and the
budget was so high I think that they
thought that the only way they could
make their money back as if they had
Batman or Wonder Woman in it but that
might wreck the atmosphere so but yeah
I'd love to see it get done in it so
it's a wonderful screenplay and we'll
see no listen it's more than that it's
it's an amazing book and I can't
recommend it enough you know it's just
it changed the way I felt and thought
about the whole this whole thing of
these settlers traveling across the
country and encountering these Native
American tribes it changed my home which
completely changed my whole perspective
of that era in time well it's that the
needle sort of swings both ways on this
on the question of a Native Americans
and there as I said there was a there
was sort of a school that was dominant
well if you actually go back you you
have kind of a mid-century impression
that you know sort of the Indians are
all bad and the Army is good right the
Cavalry's riding out right that kind of
idea of Indians mm-hmm and then you have
the beret my heart at Wounded Knee which
is a needle swinging the other way then
is these people are victims the Army is
all evil yeah which wasn't true either
and it kind of swings it swings between
one untruth to another untruth but the
actual truth is some is somewhere in the
middle oh you and you do a great job of
depicting that like you talk about the
horrific crimes that particular army
people did yes yeah yeah so there's no
in my book I'm I objectively speaking
both sides are responsible for
atrocities and you know one of the
things the Rangers learned was no
quarter you know no quarter isn't you
know when you when you if you if you can
imagine all the way into an attack on an
Indian village as men women and children
in and imagine what no quarter looks
like it's not very pretty
and that was certainly Comanche way of
doing things and that was the Texas
Rangers way of doing things when
fighting Comanches so yeah you have you
have and any number of great massacres
perpetrated against against while
Comanches and other Indian tribes yeah
it's I mean it's it's amazing I can't
recommend it enough
well thank you have you thought about
writing any other books on Native
Americans or is there any other subjects
like this you'd like to tackle you know
I I I would have probably this book
became very successful and then there
was a wave of other books that there
were really not very many books at all
before it about this particular native
culture but then there was a big wave of
them after right afterward which
inspired by the success of this book and
a good was oh yeah yeah let's see the
center of everything that is the heart
of everything that is which is which is
a version well not a version but it was
a it was a kind of doing for the Sioux
what what this book did so that might
have been a choice of mine for example
would be to go hey I'll do the Sioux and
Northern Plains Indians won't that be
great but there were some books like
that but one heart in the heart of
everything that is is is it very I would
recommend that one there was another
book actually they came out just before
by called blood and thunder that's quite
good but but uh anyway there that it it
it preempted me on some of the choices I
might have made but I'd like to return
to it I've been in the Civil War now for
a few years and yeah writing about the
Civil War I have a new book out called
hymns of the Republic about the final
year of the war I wrote a biography of
Stonewall Jackson and so I've been kind
of I took I took a right turn actually
because this book was very successful
let me sometimes when you're successful
a window opens and maybe it's never
going to open again and that window in
this case was that I could maybe do what
I wanted to do and so I picked Stonewall
Jackson just because I want to do so
well Jackson and so that made me a
right-angle turn into the Civil War
where I've been for a while what I'd
loved answers I'd love to return to
of America well it's a whole genre of
film in this country which is so
interesting right the West Wild West
movies means a gigantic genre of course
Clint Eastwood and so many other great
movies yeah even the Civil War it's like
there's so many story what we're trying
to tell this insane story of what this
country was and what it became and how
quickly it all happened you know it's so
hard for us when you you're born me me I
was born in the East Coast you know you
live around cities seems normal and then
you start hearing about the West and
then you start like as you're growing up
you start learning about cowboys and
Indians and what habit you get this sort
of weird version of it where I mean in
in high school they'd barely taught you
anything no nothing comprehensive
nothing any no anything remotely
touching on your book and then as I got
older and I started getting in it more
and more it became this really weird
puzzle to me until I read your book and
your book was actually listened to it on
audio tape and it was one of the most
sort of paradigm-shifting well it just
it's completely shifted my perspective
on and how it happened well I'm glad
it's various did that right here it was
it is it is a bit of I mean I think from
my point of view it's a bit of me being
too dumb or naive to know any better I
mean I just went in as a reporter and
reported without any particular agenda
not because I'm a noble person but just
because I just didn't have any agenda I
just reported the book and I thought
this is interesting and this is
interesting and and just laying that out
actually means you're avoiding these
sort of ideological extremes that you
know that of whatever it may be that
that is painting a picture that isn't
quite accurate for some other reason so
anyone has anybody written a good book
on Crazy Horse not that I could Larry
McMurtry wrote a pretty good book about
Crazy Horse a small volume I'm trying to
remember there was a book a few years
about crazy ores but anyway the memory
book is pretty good yeah so but so
basically so you may go back
back to this sort of subject I may if I
could find if I could find you know the
right subject so Jack Hayes was
something I could still go back Jack
Hayes was a really interesting guy yeah
it seemed like when you were talking
about in the book like this could be a
whole nother Avenue that you could take
second see going back to Kay's because
he he continues to intersect with Native
America all all through his life anyway
so it was just the whole idea of going
from a surveyor to protecting surveyors
to becoming the original Texas Ranger
which is one of the main Texas Rangers
one of the most iconic groups of humans
in the history of this country he was
the uber ranger he was the man you
affect five foot eight five foot nine
slender the high voice man let's say bad
and he had all these you know these
giant Rangers really mean people I mean
these were the people you did not want
to pick the fight with in the western
bar you know complete deference yeah
well that was what was fascinating about
is like they had put together these sort
of outcasts and those are the ones that
were able to do the job
and not only able but they nobody else
would do it I mean these were 23 year
old guys who didn't have families and it
just didn't give a shit about anything
they were happy to be out in the field
for six months without pay which was
often true I mean they often just didn't
get paid they weren't they weren't armed
they weren't paid they weren't any
there's just and they wanted to fight
Indians I mean honey only 41 year olds
you know willing to do that you know
this is such a wild group of humans you
know yeah I really do hope you write a
book about that well that would be a
I've often thought of pursuing that one
and that gets into other Native American
areas so well listen man I mean just
what just being able to talk about it on
here I'm hoping that it gives it a boost
again well thank you for whatever I'm so
glad you like it
it it's it's a great subject and it it
in some ways I think the reason I maybe
was mainly attracted to it is it told
you what happened in the American West
on some level through this one lens you
which is pretty cool you knocked another
park man thank thank you coming here
really all right you thank you
appreciate bye everybody
[Music]
well that was painless thank you
[Applause]
[Music]